docs: rewrite trusted clusters overview, how-to, and related topics (#31046)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/management/admin/trustedclusters.mdx

---
title: Configure Trusted Clusters

> description: Explains how you can configure a trust relationship and manage access between two Teleport clusters.

Reviewer: I wonder if we need more guidance on how to formulate/phrase the description. We're pretty inconsistent right now. Many of them start with "How to". Some start with a verb ("learn the key components" or "manage access requests". Others are pretty generic "Comprehensive reference for XYZ".

Author: In most cases, I prefer starting with a verb. I'm not sure how important it is to standardize. SEO keywords would probably be more bang for the buck. But if all we have are descriptions, more descriptive statements would be better than the real terse ones.

I can add this to the style guide along with some other "best practices" I'd like to see us adopt.

Reviewer 2: Since meta descriptions are for summarizing a page in search results (and to a lesser extent in social cards), I think we should adopt standards for that purpose. 

Maybe it's a matter of taste, but this seems incomplete to me:

<img width="637" alt="image" src="https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/assets/25250668/11b94af3-08df-4c05-915f-ab4dfb692240">

h1: Trusted Clusters
---

As you learned in [Core Concepts](../../core-concepts.mdx), a Teleport cluster
consists of the Teleport Auth Service, the Teleport Proxy Service, and the 
Teleport services that manage access to resources in your infrastructure.
With Teleport, you can also partition your infrastructure into multiple connected 
clusters to allow the users of one cluster—the **root cluster**—to connect to resources 
in another cluster—the **leaf cluster**—while authenticated using a single 
Teleport Auth Service. 

After you establish a trust relationship between the root and leaf clusters, the leaf cluster can
run behind a firewall without any inbound ports open. The leaf cluster creates an outbound reverse 
SSH tunnel to the root cluster and keeps the tunnel open.
When a user tries to connect to any resource in the leaf cluster, the connection goes through the 
reverse tunnel using the root cluster's proxy.

## Who uses trusted clusters?

Most organizations don't need to configure trusted clusters. In most cases, you can enroll
resources and add reverse-tunnel proxies without creating a new cluster. Typically, a single 

> teleport cluster can scale to hundreds of thousands of connected resources.

Reviewer: Hundreds of thousands is a bit ambitious. How about tens of thousands instead?

Author: to be fair, I didn't write that. It came from the architecture page: "In many cases, a single cluster is enough. A single teleport cluster can scale to hundreds of thousands of connected resources!" 
But, yeah, it felt awkward and unnecessary. I'm ditching it in favor of something simpler.

However, there are a few specific scenarios where trusted clusters can be paricularly useful.
For example, if you have a large and widely-distributed infrastructure or must provide access
to resources for external agencies, contractors, or clients, you might benefit from setting up 
a trusted cluster. The most common use cases for trusted clusters include:

- Managed service providers (MSP) remotely managing the infrastructure of their clients.
- Device manufacturers remotely maintaining computing appliances deployed on premises.
- Large cloud software vendors managing multiple data centers using a common proxy.

## How it works

In the following example, a managed service provider uses three independent clusters to 
provide access to clients in different regions:

> - Cluster `sso.example.com` is the root cluster. This cluster might have its own resources or be 

Reviewer: SSO is a whole separate concept from trusted clusters. Is there any reason we used `sso` as the name of the root? Do you think it would be easier to refer to the root as `root.example.com` instead?

strictly used for collecting audit logs and authenticating users.

> - Clusters `us-east-1a` and `us-east-1b` are two independent clusters in different availability zones.

Reviewer: Similarly, how about leaf1.example.com and leaf2.example.com?

I'm afraid that by using the name of AWS availability zones, we might be suggesting to readers that trusted clusters are a way to get higher availability. (which is not actually the case)

This change would also address an inconsistency - right now we're using a fully qualified domain name to refer to the root cluster but not for the leaf clusters.

- Each cluster is an independent x.509 and SSH certificate authority and can operate autonomously. 

>   However, each leaf cluster can only trust one root cluster at any given time.

Reviewer: I'm not an expert on trusted clusters, but I'm not sure whether this is true.

@rosstimothy?

Author: This comes from the architecture diagram:
"Teleport leaf cluster can trust one root cluster at a time"
I don't know it that's true or if it was true and no longer is. I was just moving seemingly important info out of the graphic into the body of the text. If @rosstimothy or @r0mant could advise, I'd appreciate it!

or through the root cluster acting as a bastion host.
After users sign in, they can be recognozied and trusted on the leaf clusters based on informtion in their
certificate and on how their roles in the root cluster are mapped to roles on the leaf cluster.

The Teleport Auth Service on the leaf cluster determines the resources a user has permissions to access by
checking the certificate for the following information:

- The list of **principals** that the user is authorized to use. Principals are equivalent to
  the local logins that have been added to a Teleport user profile.
- The signature of the **certificate authority** that issued the certificate. In a trusted cluster environment, 
  the Teleport Auth Service on the root cluster signs the certificate.
- The **metadata certificate extensions** that are provided by the Teleport Auth Service. Teleport uses 
  the metadata to store the list of user roles and SSH options like `permit-agent-forwarding`.
- The expiration date, or **time-to-live** (TTL) to ensure the certificate is still valid.

Based on the information in the certificate, the Teleport Auth Service performs the following actions:

> - Verifies that the certificate signature matches one of its trusted clusters.

Reviewer: This contradicts the statement above. Here we say "one of its trusted [root] clusters" (implying there can be more than one), but above we said "each leaf cluster can only trust one root cluster"

Author: This comes from a bullet buried in a detail "How does this work?" under step 4/5 in the current doc. Again, I don't know if it's true, but theoretically, the statement might not be contradictory in that a leaf can only have one root at a time but it does seem that one statement or the other is misleading.

> When a user from the root cluster attempts to access a Node in the leaf cluster, the leaf cluster's Auth Service authenticates the user's certificate and reads these pieces of data from it. It then performs the following actions:

Checks that the certificate signature matches one of its Trusted Clusters.

- Applies role mapping to associate a role on the leaf cluster with one of the roles assigned 
  to the user in the root cluster.
- Checks if the local role allows the requested identity—the Unix login—to have access.
- Verifies that the certificate has not expired. The TTL is set by the root cluster.

Note that trusted clusters only work in one direction. 

> Users from the leaf cluster can't see or connect to servers in the root cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users from the leaf cluster can't see or connect to resources in the root cluster.
```

configured with a single sign-on identity provider that authenticates her identity and her group membership.
Based on the information from the identity provider, the root cluster assigns Alice the `full-access` role
and issues her a certificate. The mapping of single sign-on properties to Teleport roles is configured when
you add an authentication connector to the Teleport cluster. To learn more about configuring single sign-on
through an external identity provider, see [Configure Single Sign-on](../../access-controls/sso).

Alice receives the certificate that specifies the roles assigned to her in the root cluster. This metadata
about her roles is contained in the certificate extensions and is protected by the signature of the root 
cluster certificate authority so it can't be tampered with.

When Alice connects to a resource in the leaf cluster `us-east-1a`, she's identified as an external user
with a certificate signed by an external certificate authority. Based on the role mapping rules in the leaf
cluster, Alice is assigned the `stage-access` role. This role allows her to access `mongodb.stage.us-east-1a`

> but not `mongodb.prod.us-east-1a`.

Reviewer: Might be cool to illustrate role mappings as a table (one column for "role in the root cluster" and another column for "mapped role in the leaf cluster)

In this example, the leaf cluster `us-east-1a` denies Alice access to the `mongodb.prod.us-east-1a` resource
because her `full-access` role in the root cluster is mapped to the `stage-access` role in this leaf cluster.
With role mapping, leaf cluster administrators can control the privileges external users are granted.
Although role mapping can be as simple as assigning users to the same roles in the root and leaf clusters,
you can also use mapping to downgrade a user's privileges or restrict access to specific resources.

Now that you know what a trusted cluster is and how it works, you can use this guide 
to learn how to:

- Identify root and leaf clusters.
- Add trusted cluster resources.
- Generate an invitation token to establish a trust relationship between a root and leaf cluster.
- Establish permission mapping between clusters using Teleport roles.
- Enable and disable trust between clusters.

## Prerequisites

To complete the steps in this guide, verify your environment meets the following requirements:

> - Access to **two** Teleport cluster instances in your environment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to **two** Teleport cluster instances.
```

1. Remove the trailing `:`
2. Remove duplicate use of "environment" (verify your environment has access to two clusters in your environment)

  - Teleport Community Edition or Teleport Enterprise if you manage the Teleport clusters on your own network.

>   - Teleport Team or Teleport Enterprise Cloud if you access Teleport as a managed cloud-based service.

Reviewer: We might also want to mention compatibility. The leaf cluster should be at the same version or at most 1 major version behind the version of the root.

>   - Teleport Team or Teleport Enterprise Cloud if you access Teleport as a managed cloud-based service.

Reviewer: Should we mention what permissions are required (not every user can create a trusted cluster relationship)

Author: What permissions are required? I would guess editor, but I didn't see anything about it and a search didn't seem to turn up anything useful.

  For information about setting up a self-hosted Teleport Enterprise cluster, see [Deploying a High 
  Availability Teleport Cluster](../deploy-a-cluster/high-availability.mdx).
  To begin a free trial of Teleport Team or upgrade to Teleport Enterprise Cloud, visit the cloud
  service [sign up page](https://goteleport.com/signup/).
  For information about the differences between Teleport editions, see [Comparing 
  editions](../choose-an-edition/introduction.mdx#comparing-editions) .

- The `tctl` admin tool and `tsh` client tool version >= (=teleport.version=).
  
  For Teleport Enterprise, Teleport Team, and Teleport Enterprise cloud, you should have
  the Enterprise version of `tctl` and `tsh` installed. 
  You can verify the tools you have installed by running the following commands:

  ```code
  $ tctl version
  # Teleport Enterprise v(=teleport.version=) go(=teleport.golang=)
  
  $ tsh version
  # Teleport v(=teleport.version=) go(=teleport.golang=)
  ```

  For more information about installing Teleport, see [Installation](../../installation.mdx).

> - A Teleport agent that is joined to the cluster you plan to use as the **leaf cluster**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Teleport SSH server that is joined to the cluster you plan to use as the **leaf cluster**.
```

>   For information about how to launch a Teleport agent in a cluster, see 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For information about how to join a resource to your cluster, see 
```

"Launch an agent in your cluster" is a bit confusing IMO

(!docs/pages/includes/permission-warning.mdx!)

## Step 1/6. Prepare the leaf cluster environment

This guide demonstrates how to enable users of your root cluster to access
a server in your leaf cluster with a specific user identity and role.
For this example, the user identity you can use to access the server in the leaf
cluster is `visitor`. Therefore, to prepare your environment, you first need to 
create the `visitor` user and a Teleport role that can assume this username when 
logging in to the server in the leaf cluster.

To add a user and role for accessing the trusted cluster:

1. Open a terminal shell on the server running the Teleport agent in the leaf cluster.

1. Add the local `visitor` user and create a home directory for the user by running the 
following command:
   
   ```code
   $ sudo useradd --create-home visitor
   ```
   
   The home directory is required for the `visitor` user to access a shell on the server.

1. Sign out of all user logins and clusters by running the following command:
   
   ```code
   $ tsh logout
   ```

1. Sign in to your **leaf cluster** from your administrative workstation using 
your Teleport username:
   
   ```code

>    $ tsh login --proxy=<Var name="leafcluster.teleport.sh" /> --user=<Var name="myuser" />

Reviewer: Earlier in this guide we used example.com and now we've switched to teleport.sh. I would be consistent throughout the guide so that the reader can do some pattern recognition.

   The cluster invite token: (=presets.tokens.first=)
   ```

   This command generates a trusted cluster invitation token to allow an inbound 
   connection from a leaf cluster. The token can be used multiple times. In this
   command example, the token has an expiration time of five minutes.
   
   Note that the invitation token is only used to establish a
   connection for the first time. Clusters exchange certificates and
   don't use tokens to re-establish their connection afterward.

   You can copy the token for later use. If you need to display the token again,
   run the following command against your root cluster:

   ```code
   $ tctl tokens ls
   Token                                                    Type            Labels   Expiry Time (UTC)
   -------------------------------------------------------- --------------- -------- ---------------------------
   (=presets.tokens.first=)                                 trusted_cluster          28 Apr 22 19:19 UTC (4m48s)
   ```

1. Create a resource configuration file called `trusted_cluster.yaml` with the
following content:

   ```yaml
   kind: trusted_cluster
   version: v2
   metadata:

>      name: rootcluster.teleport.sh

Reviewer: Similar comment to above. Let's come up with some name to refer to the root cluster, and use it consistently throughout the page. So far we have used both `sso.example.com` and `rootcluster.teleport.sh` to refer to the same cluster.

---
title: Configure Trusted Clusters
description: Explains how you can configure a trust relationship and manage access between two Teleport clusters.

> h1: Configure trusted clusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I don't think we need a separate `h1` here

---

As you learned in [Core Concepts](../../core-concepts.mdx), a Teleport cluster
consists of the Teleport Auth Service, the Teleport Proxy Service, and the 
Teleport services that manage access to resources in your infrastructure.
With Teleport, you can also partition your infrastructure into multiple connected 
clusters to allow the users of one cluster—the **root cluster**—to connect to resources 
in another cluster—the **leaf cluster**—while authenticated using a single 
Teleport Auth Service. 

After you establish a trust relationship between the root and leaf clusters, the leaf cluster can
run behind a firewall without any inbound ports open. The leaf cluster creates an outbound reverse 
SSH tunnel to the root cluster and keeps the tunnel open.
When a user tries to connect to any resource in the leaf cluster, the connection goes through the 

> reverse tunnel using the root cluster's proxy.

Reviewer 2: Does "proxy" mean "Proxy Service" here, or another proxy?

Author: Based on the surrounding context the references to proxy mean the "Teleport Proxy Service instance running on the root cluster." I still think the overuse of capitalization to emphasize productization is more distracting than helpful. Plus, it seems to run counter to the messaging issue:
18:1-20:44  warning  Incorrect messaging: "Desktop Access " (in body text). Avoid the suggestion that Teleport includes multiple products, rather than a unified access platform. You should write about adding a resource or protocol, instead of using "<Resource> Access" as a proper noun. Add "{/*lint ignore messaging*/}" above this line to bypass the linter. (Note that the line number is not accurate if the issue occurs inside a partial.)  messaging     remark-lint

> ## Who uses trusted clusters?

Reviewer 2: As with the other PR, I'm wondering if we should lowercase "Trusted Cluster" throughout the docs since it's a Teleport product. If we do decide to lowercase it, we should do so in the Core Concepts page as well.

Author: Yes, I think we should normalize case for common words.

Reviewer 2: In that case, would you mind lowercasing it in "Core Concepts" so we can keep the docs consistent?

Also, what if a common term is also a product name? E.g., if we were to lowercase "database service", it could create confusion around the Teleport Database Service vs. some other database service (e.g., a Postgres server).

Most organizations don't need to configure trusted clusters. In most cases, you can add 

> reverse-tunnel proxies and enroll and manage thousands of resources without creating a new 

Reviewer 2: Is a "reverse-tunnel proxy" the same thing as the Teleport Proxy Service?

Author: Just wondering: Are there places in the doc where that isn't the intended meaning?

cluster.

However, there are a few specific scenarios where trusted clusters can be particularly useful.
For example, if you have a large and widely-distributed infrastructure or must provide access
to resources for external agencies, contractors, or clients, you might benefit from setting up 
a trusted cluster. The most common use cases for trusted clusters include:

- Managed service providers (MSP) remotely managing the infrastructure of their clients.
- Device manufacturers remotely maintaining computing appliances deployed on premises.
- Large cloud software vendors managing multiple data centers using a common proxy.

> ## How it works

Reviewer 2: This section looks a lot like our architecture page. Would it make sense to remove it?

Another option would organize all of our Trusted Cluster docs into a dedicated subsection (as with some of our other features, like Device Trust, Login Rules, etc.) so we can reduce repetition between the how-to guide and the architecture guide.

Author: Most of the architecture information was already in both pages with minimal differences. My intent was to remove the architecture page and cover everything in one place, either on a page or a group of pages but not duplicated.

In the following example, a managed service provider uses three independent clusters to 
provide access to clients in different regions:

- Cluster `msp-root.example.com` is the root cluster. This cluster might have its own resources or be 
strictly used for collecting audit logs and authenticating users.
- Clusters `leaf-east.example.com` and `leaf-west.example.com` are two independent leaf clusters to service 
clients in different regions.
- Each cluster is an independent x.509 and SSH certificate authority and can operate autonomously.
- Each leaf cluster dials back to the root cluster to establish a reverse tunnel. If you have multiple 

> proxies, you have multiple tunnels for high availability.

Reviewer 2: Does "proxies" refer to "Proxy Service instances" here?

---

As you learned in [Core Concepts](../../core-concepts.mdx), a Teleport cluster
consists of the Teleport Auth Service, the Teleport Proxy Service, and the 
Teleport services that manage access to resources in your infrastructure.
With Teleport, you can also partition your infrastructure into multiple connected 
clusters to allow the users of one cluster—the **root cluster**—to connect to resources 
in another cluster—the **leaf cluster**—while authenticated using a single 
Teleport Auth Service. 

After you establish a trust relationship between the root and leaf clusters, the leaf cluster can
run behind a firewall without any inbound ports open. The leaf cluster creates an outbound reverse 
SSH tunnel to the root cluster and keeps the tunnel open.
When a user tries to connect to any resource in the leaf cluster, the Teleport Auth Service on the 
leaf cluster connects to the root cluster through the reverse tunnel using the Teleport Proxy Service 
instance running on the root cluster.

## Who uses trusted clusters?

Most organizations don't need to configure trusted clusters. In most cases, you can add 

> reverse-tunnel proxy instances and enroll and manage thousands of resources without creating a new 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Teleport Proxy Service instances to enroll and manage thousands of resources without creating a new 
```
To keep architectural terms consistent

Author: 1) Put the `jq` look up commands inside of the related steps. Sort of ugly.
2) I don't think adding "This guide . . ."  or "This article..." to the beginning of the description adds any value. It's pretty common to start sentences with verbs.
3) Yes, I'll change the Core concepts usage. I think Teleport Database Service is fine. But Database Service isn't any clearer than database service. If we need to make distinctions, using a full proper name is fine but trusted and cluster are just common words and you can easily overwhelm the reader with too many capitalized words 
4) 👍

  the metadata to store the list of user roles and SSH options like `permit-agent-forwarding`.
- The expiration date, or **time-to-live** (TTL) to ensure the certificate is still valid.

Based on the information in the certificate, the Teleport Auth Service performs the following actions:

- Verifies that the certificate signature matches one of its trusted root clusters.
- Applies role mapping to associate a role on the leaf cluster with one of the roles assigned 
  to the user in the root cluster.
- Checks if the local role allows the requested identity—the Unix login—to have access.
- Verifies that the certificate has not expired. The TTL is set by the root cluster.

The following diagram provides a simplified view of the interaction between the services running
on the leaf cluster and service running on the root cluster:

![Service interaction in a trusted cluster](../../../img/trusted-clusters/trusted-cluster-service-interaction.png)

Note that trusted clusters only work in one direction. 
Users from the leaf cluster can't see or connect to resources in the root cluster.

## Role relationships in a trusted cluster

> As noted in [How it works](#how-it-works), leaf clusters are autonomous. They have their own state, roles, 

Reviewer 2: Do we need to re-explain this information here if it's already explained in a previous section in the same page?

Author: Just a transition device.

because her `full-access` role in the root cluster is mapped to the `stage-access` role in this leaf cluster.
With role mapping, leaf cluster administrators can control the privileges external users are granted.
Although role mapping can be as simple as assigning users to the same roles in the root and leaf clusters,
you can also use mapping to downgrade a user's privileges or restrict access to specific resources.

Now that you know what a trusted cluster is and how it works, you can use this guide 
to learn how to:

- Identify root and leaf clusters.
- Add trusted cluster resources.
- Generate an invitation token to establish a trust relationship between a root and leaf cluster.
- Establish permission mapping between clusters using Teleport roles.
- Enable and disable trust between clusters.

## Prerequisites

To complete the steps in this guide, verify your environment meets the following requirements:

- Access to **two** Teleport cluster instances.

  - Teleport Community Edition or Teleport Enterprise if you manage the Teleport clusters on your own network.

>   - Teleport Team or Teleport Enterprise Cloud if you access Teleport as a managed cloud-based service.

Reviewer 2: I think the wording here is slightly off. To me, this sounds like you would access Teleport as a managed cloud-based service and, based on that, use Teleport Team or Teleport Enterprise Cloud. But Teleport Team/Enterprise Cloud _are_ managed cloud-based services.

Author: I don't think this adds anything. Removing it.

   - Set `spec.role_map` to map Teleport roles from the root cluster to roles in the leaf cluster.

   If you aren't sure of what values to set for the `tunnel_addr` or `web_proxy_addr`,
   see [Commands to look up cluster addresses](./trusted-cluster-address-lookup.mdx).

   You use the `role_map` setting in the `trusted_cluster` resource configuration to define how 
   roles from the root cluster map to roles on the leaf cluster. In this example, users assigned 
   the `access` role for the root cluster are granted the `visitor` role when they attempt to log 
   in to a server in the leaf cluster. This role mapping enables you to restrict access to resources
   in the leaf cluster.
   
   If your Teleport user is assigned the `access` role on the root cluster, you can use this role 
   mapping to test access to the server in the leaf cluster. If your Teleport user isn't assigned 
   the `access` role, change `access` in the `role_map` to one of your user's roles.

   Role mapping can be quite powerful for managing access in trusted clusters. For more information
   about how to use role mapping to restrict access to leaf clusters and examples of the accepted

>    syntax, see [Role mapping  in trusted clusters](#role-mapping-in-trusted-clusters).

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph and internal link add unnecessary branching. Since this is a previous section in the same page, I think a user will had the opportunity to read it already.

Author: This link is to a topic further down the page. The headings are too similar.

   ```

   Replace `leafcluster.teleport.sh` with the Teleport leaf cluster domain and 
   `myuser` with your Teleport username.

1. Retrieve the resource configuration by running the following command:

   ```code
   $ tctl get trusted_cluster/<Var name="rootcluster.teleport.sh" > trusted_cluster.yaml
   ```

1. Set the `spec.enabled` field to `false`:

   ```diff
    spec:
   -  enabled: true
   +  enabled: false
      role_map:
      - local:
        - visitor
   ```

1. Update the trusted cluster configuration by running the following command:

   ```code
   $ tctl create --force trusted_cluster.yaml
   ```
      
   This command closes the reverse tunnel between your leaf cluster and your root cluster.
   It also deactivates the root cluster's certificate authority on the leaf cluster.

You can repeat these steps to change `spec.enabled` to `true` if you want to reestablish 
the trust relationship between the leaf cluster and the root cluster.

## Remove a trusted leaf cluster

If you want to completely remove a leaf cluster without the possibility of restoring
it later, you must run commands on both the leaf cluster and the root cluster.

> TO remoe a leaf cluster completely:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To remove a leaf cluster completely:
```
